Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
Frederick Paul knows science fiction as few other people do.
He's been an editor of science fiction books and magazines, an agent who's handled the
biggest names in the field, and an author who's won numerous Hugo and Nebula awards.
With such a background, Paul is uniquely qualified to comment on science fiction.
One of the things that impresses him the most is the way science fiction has changed and
diversified since he began writing in the 1930s.
Science fiction today is not only very different from what it was in the 30s, it's very different
from other kinds of science fiction today.
One of the things that attracts me to science fiction is that there are so many different
kinds of it.
There are books like the one we mentioned before, Dahlgren, which are not a bit like the ones
by Doc Smith, Skylark stories, Lenten stories, which are not a bit like the ones by Ursula
Gwyn, which are not a bit like the one by Larry Niven, for example.
And I think that science fiction is characterized by variety.
There are very few general statements you can make about science fiction.
It isn't fiction about science, it isn't fiction about the future, it isn't fiction
about space travel.
It's fiction which has to do more than anything else with change.
Somebody asked Arthur Clarke once why he wrote science fiction and he said something like
because it's the only literature that concerns itself with reality.
Paul believes science fiction's emphasis on change can be beneficial.
I think anybody who reads science fiction is very likely to be overcome by a future
shock.
Well, when the atomic bomb fell on Hiroshima, there were only about 10,000 people in the
world who understood what had happened.
About 500 nuclear physicists and the rest were all science fiction fans.
And I think the same has been true about the space program and about many of the social
developments in the last 20 or 30 years.
And I think that if you read enough science fiction, you begin to get a spectrum of the
possible futures that lie ahead for all of us.
I think it's quite useful in the sense that it lets you make decisions now about which
ones of them you would like to avoid or which ones you would like to avert and helps you
find ways of taking actions now that will encourage the good ones and discourage the bad ones.
But it's not just that.
I think science fiction also has a good deal of entertainment of what is to me an extremely
pleasurable kind to offer.
Since the days of the Pult Magazine's in the 1920s and 1930s, science fiction has been a
separate category of literature.
Some readers have scorned it as shallower second class.
Paul believes that the book publishers are responsible for keeping science fiction separate.
He also disagrees with the notion that science fiction is in any way inferior.
The publishing industry is responsible for that and in some ways it's a bad thing.
A lot of people in this world like to read books but are prejudiced against anything that has to
word science fiction on it.
I think it's, I've forgotten the person who wrote the poem, his little poem about it which says
something like, if it's science fiction I don't like it and if I like it it can't possibly be
science fiction because there are a great many science fiction novels that everybody loves.
They just don't admit that science fiction has brave new world in 1984.
Finally, Paul believes that science fiction is uniquely qualified to treat any possible
subject matter.
I think science fiction has special qualifications to act as a vehicle for discussing anything
that affects the human being.
It's a way of looking at the human race from outside objectively.
It's a way of, it's sort of a game playing mechanism for seeing what would happen to
two human beings under conditions that haven't occurred yet but are very possible.
And I think that that's probably one of the strongest factors accounting for the continual
growth and interest in science fiction that seems to have been going on as long as I've been alive.
Music
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Music
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
Music
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
Frederick Poll has been a part of science fiction for almost 50 years.
He knows the field as few others do since he's been a fan, an author, an agent, and an editor.
He recalls what got him interested in science fiction back in the 1930s.
Well, I think it was basically the adventure, the kind of science fiction that was being published
around 1930 when I first got in touch with it.
My first discovery that it existed was mostly space opera and gimmick stories and stories about exciting,
adventurous exploits all over the galaxy.
And that was in the middle of the Great Depression, and science fiction looked an awful lot better to me than the real world that I could see.
Poll probably fulfilled a fantasy of his own when he became a science fiction editor when he was 19.
I was lucky enough to fall into a job as a professional magazine editor when I was 19.
I had asked an editor I knew because I'd been trying to sell him stories about success.
If he needed an assistant, and he was kind enough not to laugh out loud.
I didn't know at the time that not very many science fiction magazine editors could afford assistance.
But he mentioned to me another publishing company that was expanding and suggested I get a touch with them.
So I did. It was Popular Publications, one of the biggest poll passes of the time.
And they were expanding and they gave me a job at $10 a week to edit two professional science fiction magazines.
$10 wasn't so bad. They hired other editors for nothing at the same time.
Many of today's well-known writers published some of their early work with poll.
Well, I published a lot of Isogasm out of stuff because we were close friends.
A few of Robert A. Heinlein's stories that his primary market, John Campbell, for one reason or other, didn't want to print.
And Henry Kutner and A. E. Van Dout and Cleve Cartmille and Elsprague De Camp.
And most of the people who were writing at that time wound up in my magazine.
Not always with their best stories. In fact, very often with their worst stories.
Because I wasn't paying very much. I had a budget of about half a cent a word.
In the 60s, Poll edited Galaxy, one of the principal science fiction magazines of its era.
Much of the best science fiction of that period went through Poll.
His comments on how an editor deals with his authors are revealing.
Writers are very diverse human beings. Some of them respond to long letters of criticism and suggestions and patting on the back or beating over the head.
And some of them do not want any outside influence at all.
One of my favorite writers told me early in our relationship that he was willing to have me buy some stories and reject others.
He didn't want to hear why. I sent it back, just sent it back and say, send it back and say no.
And not tell him what I didn't like about it because I'd upset him.
Other writers wanted to know in great detail, not only what I didn't like, but what I did like.
And also there are some writers who are very responsive to money and some to whom money means nothing at all.
Not that they are immune to it, but they don't want to think in those terms.
And there are some writers who respond to a lot of personal attention and some who really want to be left alone.
And I had to find out something about each writer to find out the best way to deal with them.
One person Paul discovered and encouraged is one of Science Fiction's bestselling authors today, Larry Niven.
I published his first story, which is a very short one, for which he got a very short paycheck.
And his next one was a little longer and he got a little more.
And the next one was quite a lot longer and he got quite a lot more.
And Larry said that if it hadn't been for those three events in that order, he could not have gone on being a writer.
So I take some pride in the fact that I was instrumental in making it possible for him to devote his time to writing.
For many reasons, we can be grateful Frederick Paul was a Science Fiction editor.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show.
So stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on Science Fiction and Fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane, one of the best known of all Science Fiction novels is the collaboration between two authors,
Frederick Paul and Cyril Cornbluth.
The novel is a Space Merchants.
Published in 1951, the book is a clever social satire, a form of writing not often found in Science Fiction.
Huge advertising agencies run the United States.
It's a classic example of extrapolation, one of the major techniques of Science Fiction.
Frederick Paul had the original idea for the book.
He recalls where it came from.
And one of its great defects was that I didn't know anything about advertising.
So I went to the New York Sunday Times and looked in the classified section,
found a couple of people advertising jobs in advertising,
and applied and got one of them and spent about three years as an advertising copywriter.
During that time, I looked over at this old novel again and realized that it had many more faults and ignorance.
And I burned it and I had only basic information about advertising and no novel to put it in.
So I thought of writing a Science Fiction novel and it turned out to be the Space Merchants.
Before the war, Paul had belonged to a Science Fiction group in New York called the Futurians.
One member of that group was Cyril Cornbluth.
He and Paul had collaborated before on Science Fiction stories.
Paul describes their method.
Mostly what Cyril and I did was to, typically we wrote seven novels and a number of short stories together.
Generally speaking, what we did after the war, after the Space Merchants,
and we began writing novels more often than short stories.
Cyril would come out to my house in Red Bank, New Jersey,
where we kept the room for him with his own typewriter and we'd sit around and talk for a while
and discuss general areas we were interested in writing about, maybe some characters.
And then we'd flip the coin and the loser would go up to the third floor and write the first four pages.
And he'd come down and say, you're on, the other person would go up and write the next four pages.
And if you do that about 25 or 30 times, you have the rough draft of a complete novel.
Everything got radically rewritten after that because the rough draft was pretty rough, but structurally it was all there.
Cornbluth helped Paul finish the Space Merchants.
Cyril Cornbluth was a close friend of mine.
We'd collaborated before the war, before we both went into service.
And after I'd written about a third of it, because a magazine editor wanted it in a hurry,
I asked Cyril if he wanted to help me with it and he and I collaborated on it.
At the end of the Space Merchants, the protagonist, Mitch Courtney, leaves an earth which is totally disgusting.
There is no individual freedom, food and energy are strictly rationed.
Mitch heads for Venus with the idea of starting fresh, but the ending is ambiguous.
Is it hopeful or not?
I left it ambiguous partly because I wasn't feeling very positive at the time.
The novel was written in 1952 in their abouts, which was a pretty grimy period in the history of this country.
It was the McCarthy years and the Cold War years and things did not look too...
They didn't look even as good as they do now, as a matter of fact.
So I wasn't feeling optimistic.
I didn't mean to foreclose the possibility of a happy ending.
Actually, the novel had two endings. There was a different ending in the magazine version.
More upbeat, but less organically related to the rest of the novel.
It was put in at the insistence of the magazine editor.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl In.
In 1978, Frederick Poe won a rare double honor in science fiction.
It was in that year his book Gateway when both the Hugo and Nebula Awards is the best science fiction novel of the year.
The Nebula is voted on by other science fiction writers, so Poe's peers had high praise for the book.
And the Hugo results from the votes of science fiction fans and readers, so they also thought Poe's novel to be exceptional.
Both groups have good reason to think Gateway was something special.
It's an exciting narrative set against the background of a superior alien civilization.
But the twist in Gateway is that the aliens, called the Heechee, have vanished.
Humans have discovered some of their abandoned technology, though.
And that technology is impressive, but dangerous.
Humans find portals or gates in the fabric of space and special Heechee ships nearby which can travel through those gates to various places around the universe.
But the daring few who travel in the Heechee ships usually don't know where they'll end up or what they'll find when they arrive or if they'll get back.
But for those who return, the rewards can be enormous.
They usually arrive with fabulous Heechee artifacts, remnants of the superior Heechee technology, which make the travelers rich.
Right. Sort of a cosmic jackpot with a large risk involved.
Poe offers some of the reasons why Gateway turned out so well.
Well, one of the big things in Gateway was that I was under no pressure from anyone but myself to do it the way I thought it should be done.
I had my publisher at that time, a principal publisher, a man named Ian Valentine, who offered me a contract with a substantial advance to write a novel without saying what the novel was going to be and without imposing any deadline on it when I had to deliver it.
So I didn't have to discuss it with an editor ahead of time or write an outline and limit myself to the opportunities I could take.
And I didn't have the pressure of getting it delivered at a specific date to make me rush it through.
And actually, it took me, I think, six years from the time I signed the contract until I delivered it.
And I had been mulling it over for several years before that.
All in all, I think the book was something like ten years in the gestation.
And also, it's not possible for a writer to produce at the same level all the time.
I don't know why. There are times when I write better than others.
I can't relate them to any outside influence or to my resolution to do well or anything like that.
I just know that sometimes it comes out better than other times.
And Gateway, I think, is one of the times that came out very well.
The response to Gateway was strong enough to convince Paul to write a sequel, beyond the blue of enthorizon.
I wasn't too hard to convince, but I did not have any such plan.
I know that Gateway leaves a lot of questions unanswered and suggests a lot of things that are not made explicit in the novel.
And I did all that on purpose, but not for the sake of preparing a way for a sequel.
But just because I think that's the characteristic of a lot of good science fiction.
When you finish the story, you think of things that let you write your own stories after it.
I mean, that's the sort of thing that Harvard Clark does very well.
And I think I try to do it whenever I can.
And it just turned out that there was a lot of public pressure to write a sequel.
Beyond the Blue Event Horizon answers many of the questions about the Heechee that Gateway raised.
And in that book, Mankind even discovers what is probably the last surviving Heechee,
though it's found living in a symbiotic relationship with a huge machine.
Paul resolved many of the questions about the Heechee technology and revealed more about what had happened to the vanished Heechee civilization.
But there are still questions about the Heechee not answered beyond the Blue Event Horizon.
We asked Paul about a sequel to that book.
There's also been public pressure to write another sequel, and I'm just about to sign a contract to do that.
But I swear I had no such intention when I finished Beyond the Blue Event Horizon.
Alright.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
Frederick Paul writes different kinds of science fiction, all of it exciting.
He's written action-packed space opera like the Star Child trilogy he did with Jack Williamson,
and some of his more recent work like Gateway fall under that category.
But Paul also creates thoughtful science fiction with the emphasis on social comment.
It's just as fascinating in its own way.
Space Merchants is the best example of that type.
Yes, that book goes back to the 50s, but recently he's written two fine novels with social emphasis, Jim and Man Plus.
Published in 1976, Man Plus depicts the world in turmoil with political intrigue, international mistrust,
and the threat of nuclear devastation.
Very negative picture.
Paul's suggested solution is to get man off the earth, to Mars.
Paul envisions a combination of man and machine, a cyborg, adapting to the red planet, and becoming native to that planet.
I didn't make up the cyborg.
The term and the concept was invented by two Air Force or NASA.
I've forgotten which researchers in 1958 are about.
And it's been used widely in a lot of places, but I didn't make it up.
I think that we already see cyborgs in the sense that a lot of people have mechanical parts keeping them alive.
Pacemakers and artificial plastic veins and arteries and so on.
Not to mention things like glass eyes and prosthetic limbs and false teeth and so on.
But ironically, it's not humans who conceive of the cyborg, but machines.
To save man from himself, computers all over the world link up to form an artificial intelligence.
Too far out? Not necessarily, says Paul.
It's 50-50 chance, in my opinion, whether machine intelligence can ever develop these sort of independent, self-defining goals that human beings can't.
But I don't think it's impossible. It's just that machines have not yet got that smart.
Jim, published in 1979, also presents a chaotic world which this time succeeds in destroying itself.
But some humans have escaped Earth.
They're on another planet and have formed a fragile new society in combination with some aliens they meet there.
Paul meant the ending to be upbeat.
I think that it's hopeful. I think that what I was trying to say in Jim was perhaps a little more overt preaching than I usually intend.
And I'm not sure that it came across the way I intended it to.
But the subtitle of Jim is The Making of Utopia.
And what I was trying to say in the novel is that you can't really plan a utopia.
You cannot construct a society that will make everybody happy and productive and glad to be alive.
Because the happiness, satisfaction, productivity are not a state, they're a process.
And no rigid system can survive giving people maximum opportunities to realize their potential without being flexible and changeable.
Much of Paul's social science fiction deals with negative societies.
But Paul says he's basically an optimist and there's a reason for focusing on the bad side.
I'm really Pollyanna. I'm a great optimist about the world.
I think that we're in for some terrible times.
And I don't think that most of us will enjoy much of what happens in the next few years.
But I think in the long run the human race will straighten itself out and learn to be able to live better with each other.
But as far as writing a novel is concerned, it's not too interesting to write about a utopia.
What are you going to say about a bunch of people who walk around in togas and eat whole wheat bread?
Never have any bad thoughts.
It's much more interesting to paint the disasters that may occur as they sort of...
Well, I think it's Keith Leamus who calls that kind of science fiction cautionary literature.
It's not saying what will happen, it's just warning what might happen if we don't watch out.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show